---
layout: post
title: How Academic Publishing (Doesn't) Work
description: ""
cover-img: "/assets/img/traintracks.jpg"
tags: ['grad school', 'academia', 'journals']
---

## Intro
Historically, scientists communicated [to the public through books and to each other with letters](http://garfield.library.upenn.edu/essays/v4p394y1979-80.pdf)
Around the 17th century, scientific societies were formed to "[share their results in person, and presumably consume alcohol](https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/information-culture/the-mostly-true-origins-of-the-scientific-journal/)"
Over time, these began to publish periodicals, which were the precursors to modern academic journals.
However, the journals we have today are largely a result of the expansion and codification of academia in the decades after WWII (read [Fyfe et al.](http://garfield.library.upenn.edu/essays/v4p394y1979-80.pdf) for a more in-depth though fairly UK-centric description).

That is to say, modern academic journals are inefficient due to a combination of historical tradition and more modern profit considerations.
The costs of this inefficiency is largely borne by scientists, and better alternatives exist.
This post discusses what is wrong with the current system of publication in academia, and how it can be fixed.


## Costs of the current system
### Time
- Cite months from preprint to publication from David's paper

- Scientists are expected to review articles without pay

### Money
Scientists pay journals for the right to have them take the rights to their paper.
They then give some of their grant money to their university to pay the journals again for the right to read their paper on the journals' website.

In many journals open access is a privilege, not a right, and that privilege costs thousands of dollars per paper.

- Academic publication 

- UC System negotiations

### Property
#### Scientists don't own their papers

#### Not even open in principle
People who work with software frequently know that the words "can use" are very contextual.
There is tons of software that is publicly available on Github that you "can" download and use however you want, so long as you're not building a business around it.
Even in more restrictive domains like movie or music there is still an [educational fair use](https://www.lib.uchicago.edu/copyrightinfo/fairuse.html#fair) exception.

Academic publishing is nowhere near that permissive.

- Chris Albon anecdote around downloading papers to read while in Europe - 
Posession of large numbers of academic articles will cause people to show up at your office. 
Possession with the intent to distribute [is even worse](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aaron_Swartz).



### Integrity

- Peer review is single blind rather than double blind, which isn't great but is hard to work around
- There is incentive for reviewers to be as critical as possible - the papers they are reviewing are likely those of their competitors, and the blinding only goes one way.

### Science
All these costs are levied against scientists (except some of the financial ones which are borne by taxpayers).
What would happen if scientists didn't have to spend so much time pandering to reviewers and could spend that time doing science instead?

Additionally, science depends on a record of past research artifacts.
If a journal's systems were to be [ransomwared](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ransomware#Growth), would they pay the ransom?
Given that it's illegal for anyone else to have copies of "their" papers, failure to pay ransom would lead to a huge gap in the academic record.

## Why do journals still exist?
- High impact factor journals act as advertisement for scientists without a strong network or social media presence
- Publications and citations are the unit of academic currency, and they are tied to promotion within academia.
- Institutional inertia
- Journals act as a filter for paper readers


## Alternatives
How do we achieve the roles above while reducing the costs?

### Conference system
- CS doesn't really have these problems; they just preprint and present at conferences
### Debundle publication and peer review
- pseudonymous peer review (with reputation system)
- Mercenary peer reviewers (what if we paid people for the work they did?)
### Debundle publication and article collection
- Overlay journals
- Freelance paper aggregators (AK, Aran Komatsuzaki)

### What lies beyond?
Journals are a remnant of a time when scientific communication was done through words on paper.
The ideas above list how this system could be adapted to be more efficient, but the academic journal isn't the platonic ideal of academic communication.
With the power of free distribution, what becomes possible?

- Public lab notebooks (why discretize a continuous process into paper-sized chunks?)
- Publishing negative results
- Interactive papers (https://distill.pub/about/)
- Automatically reproducible papers
- Video journals (Yannic Kilcher is probably the best example. OMGenomics is similar, but with a broader focus).
- Code review
- Grant contracts - atoms.org

### Reading
- "Why is it so hard to access science? Because the modern academic publishing model is set up to be difficult and turn a (massive) profit for publishers. The goal is to make money, not disseminate knowledge." - https://nicolebarbaro.substack.com/p/failedjournals
- New science?
- "This has ... been a time of growing divergence between the different roles of academic publishing: as a means of disseminating validated knowledge, as a form of symbolic capital for academic career progression, and as a profitable business enterprise." - https://zenodo.org/record/546100


### Further Reading
- https://tribunemag.co.uk/2021/08/we-cant-trust-the-market-with-scientific-knowledge
